---
title: Why Philosophy
date: 2022/12/30
description: Some thoughts on the value of philosophy.
tag: philosophy
author: You
---

*NOTE: This is an old post of mine on philosophy. It is very rusty and I'm thinking of rewriting it, but for now, here are some thoughts from my high school self.*

Philosophy, as a profession, has been viewed with a mixture of contempt and awe. Although the intellectual rigour of studying philosophy is well-recognized, the thought of pursuing a career in philosophy is unthinkable to most. A common refrain is it is an unemployable hobby horse. Why not pursue a lucrative career in STEM where you can build things, change the world for the better, cure cancer or do a combination of them all. Thinking a lot won’t get you anywhere. But this misses the point.

Whereas science prides itself on observing the world around us, philosophy digs deeper, beyond the underlying foundations of science. Science blindly relies on our senses to provide information about the world, yet philosophers beginning with Descartes have shown that our senses are prone to deception and secondary qualities such as colour, taste, and hardness do not objectively exist without a viewer. Science heralds the power of man to find the truth with his naked eyes, while philosophy questions the nature of a truth. At best, science tells us the facts of the world, but philosophy provides the guidebook: how and when it is appropriate to wield these facts. The asymmetry between the two has led to the present day threat that our man-made technologies may be the downfall of humankind. Take, for example carbon-spewing vehicles and factory machines, among other inventions, that have mercilessly wrecked disaster on our climate. Or our embrace of nuclear energy, spawning a new generation of weapons that, if misfired or fired out of retaliation or supposed “self-defense” could annihilate whole cities. Or, even more pervasively, the guns and tanks that were invented for who knows why but are responsible for mass casualties due to homicide and war. Science places a figurative machine gun into the hands of a reckless species and trusts humanity to fire at will. Philosophy puts an adult in the room; it provides a set of guidelines for living well, confiscating the gun if it proves to be wholly detrimental. Will Durant summarizes this thought nicely: “But the philosopher is not content to describe the fact; he wishes to ascertain its relation to experience in general, and thereby to get at its meaning and its worth.” The nakedness of science covets the clothes of philosophy.

The ancient Greeks came up with the idea of eudaemonia which directly translates to “happiness” but is, more accurately, a way of living. This is perhaps how we should think of philosophy. Not as a collection of textbook theories, but a way of perceiving the world. In my view, there are two main components of this: curiosity and self-moderation. First, philosophy is the view that you can and should always question everything. ‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’ is probably the most famous of these. And this does not have to just involve metaphysics, it can be as simple as questioning my duty to pay taxes to the state (which can be extended to the broader: do I have a duty to obey the law?). Socrates himself proclaimed that “the unexamined life is a life not worth living.” When philosophy is criticized for being overly theoretical and ‘impractical’, this is precisely missing the point as meaning in life comes from choosing to not absently react to the world but to pursue morality and a deliberate life. Secondly, philosophy is about self-moderation or in other words, a philosophy of living. Aristotle believed that everything, human, object or institution, had a telos (purpose). For many of us, we are forced to weigh instant gratification over genuine content and value to our lives. Philosophy provides us with a broader purpose to strive for and values to align ourselves with. To think more deeply about philosophy is also to think more about what constitutes a good person. An author I once read put it eloquently: “Losing is painful but deeply meaningful.” The happiness that studying philosophy provides is not of a shallow, emotional kind, but the kind that provides purpose. If you choose to disagree with the first school of thought, as Wittgenstein has famously done with his claim that “philosophy is a byproduct of misunderstanding language”, the second is still a compelling framework in which to lead your life.

Philosophy is not just about the intellectual pursuit. Without philosophy, life would be a continuous demonstration of “doing the motions” over and over again until they are routine, akin to endlessly running on a hedonic treadmill. Thinking philosophically introduces newfound perspective into mundane things, offering happiness in the sense of purpose over lust. But more broadly, philosophy shields us from the abuses of science, and offers us a set of guidelines and beckonings to preserve our species in the face of present circumstances.

